Raskolnikov was not accustomed to the crowd and, as has already been said, he fled all society,
especially in recent times. But now he was suddenly drawn to people. Something was happening in him, as it were new,
and at the same time, some kind of thirst for people was felt. He was so tired from a whole month of this concentrated
anguish of his own and gloomy excitement that even if for a moment he wanted to breathe in another world, at least
in any one, and, despite all the dirt of the situation, he now remained with pleasure in the drinking-room.
The proprietor of the establishment was in another room, but he often entered the main one, descending into it from
somewhere along the steps, and his smart oiled boots with large red lapels showed up first of all. He was in an
undershirt and a terribly greasy black satin waistcoat, without a tie, and his whole face seemed to be smeared with
oil, like an iron lock. Behind the stall was a boy of about fourteen, and there was another boy younger who served,
if anything was asked. There were crumbled cucumbers, black crackers and fish cut into pieces; it all smelled very
bad. It was stuffy, so that it was even unbearable to sit, and everything was so saturated with the smell of wine
that, it seems, one could become drunk from this air alone in five minutes.
There are other meetings, even with people completely unfamiliar to us, in whom we begin to be interested at first
sight, somehow suddenly, suddenly, before we say a word. Such was the exact impression made on Raskolnikov by the
guest who sat at a distance and looked like a retired official. The young man later recalled this first impression
several times and even attributed it to a presentiment. He kept looking at the official, of course, and also because
the official himself was stubbornly looking at him, and it was clear that he really wanted to start a conversation.
At the rest, who were in the tavern, not excluding the owner, the official looked somehow habitually and even with
boredom, and at the same time with a touch of some arrogant disdain, as if at people of a lower status and development,
with whom he had nothing to talk about. He was a man already in his fifties, of medium height and solid build,
with gray hair and a large bald head, with a yellow, even greenish face swollen from constant drunkenness, and with
swollen eyelids, because of which tiny, like slits, but animated reddish eyes shone. . But there was something very
strange about him; in his eyes even rapture seemed to glow—perhaps there was both sense and intelligence—but at the
same time there seemed to be a glimpse of madness. He was dressed in an old, completely tattered black tailcoat,
with crumbling buttons. Only one was still holding on somehow, and he fastened on it, apparently wanting to keep
up appearances. From under the nanke waistcoat protruded a shirt-front, all crumpled, soiled and flooded. His
face was shaved like a bureaucrat's, but long ago, so that his bluish stubble had already begun to protrude
thickly. Yes, and in his tricks there really was something solid bureaucratic. But he was restless, ruffled his
hair and sometimes, in anguish, propped up his head with both hands, resting his tattered elbows on the flooded
and sticky table. At last he looked directly at Raskolnikov and said loudly and firmly:
Do I dare, my dear sir, to address you with a decent conversation? For although you are not in a significant form,
but my experience distinguishes in you a person educated and unaccustomed to drink. I myself have always respected
education, combined with cordial feelings, and, in addition, I am a titular adviser. Marmeladov is such a surname;
titular adviser. I dare to know, did you deign to serve?
No, Im studying ... the young man answered, somewhat surprised both by the special ornate tone of speech, and by
the fact that they addressed him so directly, point-blank. Despite his recent instant desire for at least some kind
of community with people, at the first word really addressed to him, he suddenly felt his usual unpleasant and irritable
feeling of disgust for any stranger who touched or wanted only to touch his personality.
- A student, therefore, or a former student! cried the official, "I thought so! Experience, sir, repeated experience!
- and in a sign of boasting, he put his finger to his forehead. - Were a student or a scientific part! And let me ... -
He half got up, swayed, grabbed his dish, a glass, and sat down to the young man, somewhat obliquely from him. He was
tipsy, but he spoke eloquently and smartly, occasionally only getting a little confused in places and dragging out
his speech. With a sort of greed, he attacked Raskolnikov, as though he had not spoken to anyone for a whole month.
"Dear sir," he began almost solemnly, "poverty is not a vice, it is the truth. I know that drunkenness is not a virtue,
and this is all the more so. But poverty, sir, poverty is a vice. In poverty, you still retain your nobility of innate
feelings; in poverty, no one ever does. For poverty, they are not even expelled with a stick, but with a broom they
sweep out of human company, so that it would be all the more insulting; and justly, for in poverty I am the first to
insult myself.